---
layout: post
title: "Stateful model serving: how we accelerate inference using ONNX Runtime"
date: '2020-12-14'
tags: []
author: lesters
image: assets/2020-12-14-stateful-model-serving-how-we-accelerate-inference-using-onnx-runtime/vespa_ort_logos_vert.png
excerpt: There's a difference between stateless and stateful model serving.

---

*By Lester Solbakken from Yahoo and Pranav Sharma from Microsoft.*

There's a difference between stateless and stateful model serving.

Stateless model serving is what one usually thinks about when using a
machine-learned model in production. For instance, a web application handling
live traffic can call out to a model server from somewhere in the serving
stack. The output of this model service depends purely on the input. This is
fine for many tasks, such as classification, text generation, object detection,
and translation, where the model is evaluated once per query.

There are, however, some applications where the input is combined with stored
or persisted data to generate a result. We call this stateful model evaluation.
Applications such as search and recommendation need to evaluate models with a
potentially large number of items for each query. A model server [can quickly
become a scalability
bottleneck](https://blog.vespa.ai/the-hardest-problem-in-computing/) in these
cases, regardless of how efficient the model inference is.

In other words, stateless model serving requires sending all necessary input
data to the model. In stateful model serving, the model should be computed
where the data is stored.

At [Vespa.ai](https://vespa.ai/), we are concerned with efficient stateful
model evaluation.  Vespa.ai is an open-source platform for building
applications that do real-time data processing over large data sets. Designed
to be highly performant and web-scalable, it is used for such diverse tasks as
search, personalization, recommendation, ads, auto-complete, image and
similarity search, comment ranking, and [even for finding
love](https://tech.okcupid.com/vespa-vs-elasticsearch-for-matching-millions-of-people-6e3af18eb4dc).

It has become increasingly important for us to be able to evaluate complex
machine-learned models efficiently. Delivering low latency, fast inference and
low serving cost is challenging while at the same time providing support for
the various model training frameworks.

We eventually chose to leverage [ONNX
Runtime](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime) (ORT) for this task. ONNX
Runtime is an accelerator for model inference. It has vastly increased
Vespa.ai's capacity for evaluating large models, both in performance and model
types we support. ONNX Runtime's capabilities within hardware acceleration and
model optimizations, such as quantization, has enabled efficient evaluation of
large NLP models like BERT and other Transformer models in Vespa.ai.

In this post, we'll share our journey on why and how we eventually chose ONNX
Runtime and share some of our experiences with it.

### About Vespa.ai

Vespa.ai has a rich history. Its lineage comes from a search engine born in 1997.
Initially powering the web search at alltheweb.com, it was flexible
enough to be used in various more specialized products, or verticals, such as
document search, mobile search, yellow pages, and banking. This flexibility in
being a vertical search platform eventually gave rise to its name, Vespa.

The technology was acquired by Yahoo in 2003. There, Vespa cemented itself as a
core piece of technology that powers hundreds of applications, including many
of Yahoo's most essential services. We open-sourced Vespa in 2017 and today it
serves hundreds of thousands of queries per second worldwide at any given time,
with billions of content items for hundreds of millions of users.

Although Yahoo was eventually acquired by Verizon, it is interesting to note
that our team has stayed remarkably stable over the years. Indeed, a few of the
engineers that started working on that initial engine over 20 years ago are
still here. Our team counts about 30 developers, and we are situated in
Trondheim in Norway.

Building upon experience gained over many years, Vespa.ai has evolved
substantially to become what it is today. It now stands as a battle-proven
general engine for real-time computation over large data sets. It has [many
features](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/features.html) that make it
suitable for web-scale applications. It stores and indexes data with instant
writes so that queries, selection, and processing over the data can be
performed efficiently at serving time. It's elastic and fault-tolerant, so
nodes can be added, removed, or replaced live without losing data. It's easy to
configure, operate, and add custom logic. Importantly, it contains built-in
capabilities for advanced computation, including machine learned models.

### Vespa.ai applications

![Vespa architecture](/assets/2020-12-14-stateful-model-serving-how-we-accelerate-inference-using-onnx-runtime/vespa_architecture.png)

Vespa.ai is a distributed application consisting of stateless nodes and a set
of stateful content nodes containing the data. A Vespa.ai application is fully
defined in an application package. This is a single unit containing everything
needed to set up an application, including all configuration, custom
components, schemas, and machine-learned models. When the application package
is deployed, the admin layer takes care of configuring all the services across
all the system's nodes. This includes distributing all models to all content
nodes.

Application packages contain one or more document schemas. The schema primarily
consists of:

- The data fields for each document and how they should be stored and indexed.
- The ranking profiles which define how each document should be scored during query handling.

The ranking profiles contain ranking expressions, which are mathematical
expressions combining [ranking
features](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/ranking-expressions-features.html).
Some features retrieve data from sources such as the query, stored data, or
constants. Others compute or aggregate data in various ways. Ranking profiles
support multi-phased evaluation, so a cheap model can be evaluated in the first
phase and a more expensive model for the second. Both sparse and dense
[tensors](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/tensor-user-guide.html) are
supported for more advanced computation.

After the application is deployed, it is ready to handle data writes and
queries. Data feeds are first processed on the stateless layer before content
is distributed (with redundancy) to the content nodes. Similarly, queries go
through the stateless layer before being fanned out to the content nodes where
data-dependent computation is handled. They return their results back to the
stateless layer, where the globally best results are determined, and a response
is ultimately returned.

A guiding principle in Vespa.ai is to move computation to the data rather than
the other way around. Machine-learned models are automatically deployed to all
content nodes and evaluated there for each query. This alleviates the cost of
query-time data transportation. Also, as Vespa.ai takes care of distributing
data to the content nodes and redistributing elastically, one can scale up
computationally by adding more content nodes, thus distributing computation as
well.

In summary, Vespa.ai offers ease of deployment, flexibility in combining many
types of models and computations out of the box without any plugins or
extensions, efficient evaluation without moving data around and a less complex
system to maintain. This makes Vespa.ai an attractive platform.

### ONNX in Vespa.ai

In the last few years, it has become increasingly important for Vespa.ai to
support various types of machine learned models from different frameworks. This
led to us introducing initial support for ONNX models in 2018.

The [Open Neural Network Exchange](https://onnx.ai/) (ONNX) is an open standard
for distributing machine learned models between different systems. The goal of
ONNX is interoperability between model training frameworks and inference
engines, avoiding any vendor lock-in. For instance, HuggingFace’s Transformer
library includes export to ONNX, PyTorch has native ONNX export, and TensorFlow
models can be converted to ONNX. From our perspective, supporting ONNX is
obviously interesting as it would maximize the range of models we could
support.

To support ONNX in Vespa.ai, we introduced a special onnx ranking feature. When
used in a ranking expression this would instruct the framework to evaluate the
ONNX model. This is one of the unique features of Vespa.ai, as one has the
flexibility to combine results from various features and string models
together. For instance, one could use a small, fast model in an early phase,
and a more complex and computationally expensive model that only runs on the
most promising candidates. For instance:

```
document my_document {
  field text_embedding type tensor(x[769]) {
    indexing: attribute | index
    attribute {
      distance-metric: euclidean
    }
  }
  field text_tokens type tensor(d0[256]) {
    indexing: summary | attribute
  }
}

onnx-model my_model {
  file: files/my_model.onnx
  input input_0: ...
  input input_1: ...
  output output_0: ...
}

rank-profile my_profile {
  first-phase {
    expression: closeness(field, text_embedding)
  }
  second-phase {
    rerank-count: 10
    expression: onnx(my_model)
  }
}
```

This is an example of configuring Vespa.ai to calculate the euclidean distance
between a query vector and the stored `text_embedding` vector in the first stage.
This is usually used together with an approximate nearest neighbor search. The
top 10 candidates are sent to the ONNX model in the second stage. Note that
this is per content node, so with 10 content nodes, the model is running
effectively on 100 candidates.

The model is set up in the `onnx-model` section. The file refers to an ONNX model
somewhere in the application package. Inputs to the model, while not actually
shown here for brevity, can come from various sources such as constants, the
query, a document, or some combination expressed through a user-defined
function. While the output of models are tensors, the resulting value of a
first or second phase expression needs to be a single scalar, as documents are
sorted according to this score before being returned.

Our initial implementation of the `onnx` ranking feature was to import the ONNX
model and convert the entire graph into native Vespa.ai expressions. This was
feasible because of the flexibility of the various [tensor
operations](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/ranking-expressions.html#tensor-functions)
Vespa.ai supports. For instance, a single neural network layer could be
converted like this:

![Model rank expression](/assets/2020-12-14-stateful-model-serving-how-we-accelerate-inference-using-onnx-runtime/model_to_expression.png)

Here, weights and bias would be stored as constant tensors, whereas the input
tensor could be retrieved either from the query, a document field, or some
combination of both.

Initially, this worked fine. We implemented the various [ONNX
operators](https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/master/docs/Operators.md) using
the available tensor operations. However, we only supported a subset of the
150+ ONNX operators at first, as we considered that only certain types of
models were viable for use in Vespa.ai due to its low-latency requirement. For
instance, the ranking expression language does not support iterations, making
it more challenging to implement operators used in convolutional or recurrent
neural networks. Instead, we opted to continuously add operator support as new
model types were used in Vespa.ai.

The advantage of this was that the various optimizations we introduced to our
tensor evaluation engine to efficiently evaluate the models benefitted all
other applications using tensors as well.

### ONNX Runtime

Unfortunately, we ran into problems as we started developing support for
Transformer models. Our first attempt at supporting a 12-layer BERT-base model
failed. This was a model converted from TensorFlow to ONNX. The evaluation
result was incorrect, with relatively poor performance.

We spent significant efforts on this. Quite a few operators had to be rewritten
due to, sometimes very subtle, edge cases. We introduced a dozen or so
performance optimizations, to avoid doing silly stuff such as calculating the
same expressions multiple times and allocating memory unnecessarily.
Ultimately, we were able to increase performance by more than two orders of
magnitude.

During this development we turned to [ONNX
Runtime](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime) for reference. ONNX Runtime
is very easy to use:

```
import onnxruntime as ort
session = ort.InferenceSession(“model.onnx”)
session.run( output_names=[...], input_feed={...} )
```

This was invaluable, providing us with a reference for correctness and a
performance target.

At one point, we started toying with the idea of actually using ONNX Runtime
directly for the model inference instead of converting it to Vespa.ai
expressions. The Vespa.ai content node is written in C++, so this entailed
integrating with the C++ interface of ONNX Runtime. It should be mentioned that
adding dependencies to Vespa.ai is not something we often do, as we prefer to
avoid dependencies and thus own the entire stack.

Within a couple of weeks, we had a proof of concept up and running which showed
a lot of promise. So we decided to go ahead and start using ONNX Runtime to
evaluate all ONNX models in Vespa.ai.

This proved to be a game-changer for us. It vastly increases the capabilities
of evaluating large deep-learning models in Vespa.ai in terms of model types we
support and evaluation performance. We can leverage ONNX Runtime's use of
[MLAS](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/tree/master/onnxruntime/core/mlas),
a compute library containing processor-optimized kernels. ONNX Runtime also
contains model-specific optimizations for BERT models (such as multi-head
attention node fusion) and makes it easy to evaluate precision-reduced models
by quantization for even more efficient inference.


### ONNX Runtime in Vespa.ai

Consider the following:

```
onnx-model my_model {
  file: files/my_model.onnx
  input input_0: query(my_query_input)
  input input_1: attribute(my_doc_field)
}

rank-profile my_profile {
  first-phase {
    expression: sum( onnx(my_model) )
  }
}
```

Here we have a single ONNX model that has two inputs. During application
deployment, Vespa.ai distributes this ONNX model to all content nodes. There,
the ranking expressions are parsed, and the feature executors that implement
the ranking features are set up in preparation for handling traffic. Here we
have 4 features:

- `query(...)` which retrieves a tensor from the query.
- `attribute(...)` which retrieves a tensor from a field stored in the document.
- `onnx(...)` which evaluates the ONNX model.
- `sum(...)` which reduces and sums the argument tensor to a single scalar value.

These features are wired together during initialization, so the outputs of
`query` and `attribute` are used as inputs to `onnx`, and the output of the
`onnx` feature is the input to the `sum` feature. The `onnx` feature basically sets
up ONNX Runtime to evaluate the model.

Vespa.ai’s scoring framework is written in C++, so we use the C/C++ API
provided by ONNX Runtime. While the integration with ONNX Runtime worked
smoothly out of the box, there are two areas worth mentioning here:
multi-threading and input/output tensor allocations.

#### Multi-threading

During setup, we initialize an ONNX Runtime session for each onnx feature and
thread:

```
#include <onnxruntime/onnxruntime_cxx_api.h>

Ort::Env shared_env;

Ort::SessionOptions options;
options.SetIntraOpNumThreads(1);
options.SetInterOpNumThreads(1);
options.SetGraphOptimizationLevel(ORT_ENABLE_ALL);

Ort::Session session = Ort::Session(shared_env, “local_file_path”, options);
```

The session includes options for
[thread management](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/9cca219b1aa2dd649d731298ba1249a184c9133f/docs/ONNX_Runtime_Perf_Tuning.md#thread-management).
<!-- ToDo: this doc is not on master branch anymore, link to new location -->
ONNX Runtime supports 2 modes of execution: sequential and parallel. This
controls whether the operators in a graph run sequentially or in parallel.
Parallel execution of operators is scheduled on an inter-op thread pool. The
execution of an individual operator is parallelized using an intra-op thread
pool. A heavily home-optimized variant of an Eigen thread pool is used for
inter-op parallelism, while OpenMP is used for intra-op.

Vespa.ai handles several queries in parallel. In addition, Vespa.ai can be
configured to use several threads per query. Because of this Vespa.ai needs to
tightly manage thread usage. Using additional threads inside an ONNX Runtime
session causes system-level throughput to become unpredictable, with large
deviations in performance. Since Vespa.ai has thread control outside of ONNX
Runtime, we need to instruct ONNX Runtime to only use a single thread. By
ensuring that the total number of threads do not exceed the number of physical
cores in a machine, we can improve cache utilization. Vespa also supports
processor pinning.

As we instruct ONNX Runtime to in effect run sequentially, inference times
increase but total throughput also increases. For instance, we measured a 50%
improvement in throughput on a BERT ranking application. We have not yet
exposed ONNX Runtime’s thread management settings for cases where users would
like to tune this themselves. This is an option we might consider in the
future. In that case, each session having their own set of thread pools would
be inefficient. However, ONNX Runtime provides an option to share thread pools
between sessions. This is achieved using the `CreateEnvWithGlobalThreadPools` C
API to set up the `shared_env` object, which in Vespa.ai is shared between all
feature executors.

When we started using ONNX Runtime, its C++ distribution was bundled with
OpenMP. This was problematic for us as the intra-operation thread setting was
overridden by OpenMP, so we ended up compiling our own ONNX Runtime without
OpenMP enabled. However, starting from version 1.6, ONNX Runtime ships a
version without OpenMP.

#### Input and output tensors

As much as possible, memory allocation and ownership of input and output
tensors happen within Vespa.ai. Consider the following types:

```
std::vector<const char *> input_names;
std::vector<const char *> output_names;
std::vector<Ort::Value>   input_values;
std::vector<Ort::Value>   output_values;
```

The input values come from other ranking features using Vespa.ai’s tensor
framework. The values in the input vector are wrappers for Vespa.ai tensors. So
ONNX Runtime accepts the memory layout from Vespa.ai without copying to
internal buffers. The values in the output vector are pre-allocated ONNX
Runtime vectors which are wrapped when used subsequently in other ranking
features.

We use these directly when evaluating the model:

```
Ort::RunOptions run_opts(nullptr);
session.Run(run_opts,
    input_names.data(), input_values.data(), input_values.size(),
    output_names.data(), output_values.data(), output_values.size());
```

This zero-copying of tensors is obviously desirable from a performance
perspective. This works for outputs as tensors in Vespa.ai currently are fixed
size, meaning that the dimensions are known during application deployment. So
even though models accept inputs with dynamic sizes, from a Vespa.ai
perspective, they must currently be fixed. Supporting dynamic sizes is future
work.

One limitation here is that Vespa.ai currently only supports double and float
value types in tensors. If possible, Vespa.ai takes care of converting to the
type that ONNX Runtime expects. For instance, inputs to Transformer models are
token sequences usually of type int64. Since Vespa.ai does not currently
support int types, they must be represented as for instance float32. Converting
from float32 to int64 can be lossy, but we haven’t met any inaccuracies yet.
Models that accept strings as input are not yet supported in Vespa.ai.


### Summary

Integrating with ONNX Runtime was relatively painless. Even though we initially
had to compile our own ONNX Runtime distribution due to OpenMP, we had no
significant issues with dependencies. We are looking forward to the next
release so we don’t have to have to do this.

While ONNX Runtime’s C/C++ API documentation is currently relatively scarce we
found it to be sufficient. The ONNX Runtime API is concrete, clean and works as
one would expect. We didn’t have any issues here at all, really.

All in all, our experience with ONNX Runtime has been great. It has shown
itself to be a fantastic fit for Vespa.ai, delivering superior performance and
easy to work with. One example here is the BERT model optimizations in ONNX
Runtime. Also of particular note is the evaluation of quantized models, which
would have been laborious to implement in Vespa.ai given the current tensor
types we support.

Going forward, there are other features of ONNX Runtime we would like to
experiment with. One of these is GPU support. While we are currently unsure if
this is beneficial from a ranking point of view, there are other cases where
this is interesting. One example is calculating vector representations of
documents during data writing from a Transformer model.

Vespa.ai’s use case so far has mostly been focused on natural language
understanding using Transformers such as BERT. [Exporting a HuggingFace model
to
ONNX](https://medium.com/microsoftazure/accelerate-your-nlp-pipelines-using-hugging-face-transformers-and-onnx-runtime-2443578f4333)
is easy and using it in Vespa is straightforward. ONNX Runtime was essential
for us when implementing an [open-domain question-answering
application](https://blog.vespa.ai/efficient-open-domain-question-answering-on-vespa/).
Also, quantization had the effect of [drastically increasing
performance](https://blog.vespa.ai/from-research-to-production-scaling-a-state-of-the-art-machine-learning-system/)
of this application, where a key takeaway there was that a larger model with
weights with reduced precision outperformed smaller models with normal
precision.

We’re excited to see what our users will use this for in the future.

